IRC is a great big social gathering on the internet.

Unless the channel topic makes an exception, don't speak within 5min of
joining. This is because there might be a conversation going on, and it's
impolite to interrupt. 

If you're asking for help, imagine what information you would need to help
someone with a similar problem, and offer that information up front. It makes
extra work and wastes peoples' time to force them to drag the information out
of you -- so they probably won't. This is why "I have a problem" questions sit
unanswered. 

Another way of wasting peoples' time by forcing them to drag information out
of you is to ask for specific help in applying the tool to a extremely
specialized use case, especially that of a solved problem. If you've Googled
the question and all the other people who ask it have been pointed toward a
different technology, please plan to present a clear and sensible reason why
the correct solution won't work. The Python community summarizes this type of
XY problem with an anecdote about grandmothers and chainsaws. 

Address people correctly. Do not include the symbol before their name; it's a
"hat" which signifies the permissions they have in the channel. Use tab
completion to ensure that you spell peoples' handles correctly. If referring
to someone in the third person, don't assume you know which pronouns they
prefer -- It's far safer to say "jsmith pointed me to this post on their blog
when I asked earlier" than "jsmith showed me his blog" and find that the J in
fact belongs to a Jane Smith who prefers female pronouns. If an IRC user wants
you to know a name they use other than their IRC handle, you can use /whois to
see that information.

Entering an IRC channel is like walking into someone's home, office, or
classroom. You don't usually know what kind of room you're entering until
you've joined, so pause, look around (your client will helpfully show you a
list of users in the channel and the topic. Read the links in the topic.
Understand what they are and what they do, and imagine the errors committed by
newbies which caused them to be added. 

If you're capable of using your IRC client's basic features, it's often
nonsensical to ask "is anyone online?" in the channel. If you want to know how
many people are connected to the channel, use /list. If you have a question,
ask it. If you just want to chat, connect to several offtopic/chat channels
and watch the discussion until there's a general conversation where you have
something to add, then add it. If you want to start a conversation in your
favorite chat channel, why not do so by asking a thought-provoking question
(even "would you rather fight 100 duck-sized horses or 1 horse-sized duck")
rather than passively demanding that someone else come along and entertain
you?




The Unanswered Questions of IRC: 

"I have a problem". 

"Does anybody here know about Git?"

"What's this channel for? Is there a website?"

"$THING doesn't work"

"Join my network!"

"is anybody here?"
